---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-09-20 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-09-20 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 2

### Due Date
**This homework is due September 27, 2019 at the end of day.**

### Homework 2 - Linear Formulas
Write a python script named ```homework02.py```.

In this homework, you will write a Python program that takes user input consisting of two points and an x-value and uses the linear formulas to compute a y-value.

Recall that the slope ```m``` of a line is equal to ```rise/run``` where ```rise``` is equal to the difference between two ```y``` values and ```run``` is equal to the difference between two ```x``` values.  Also recall that the slope-intercept formula for a line is defined as ```y = mx + b``` where ```b``` is the ```y``` value where ```x = 0```.  Given these formulas, we know that two points define a line and we can then compute the y-value of any other point on the line given an unknown x-value.

You must take as user input ```x1```, ```y1```, ```x2```, ```y2```, and ```x``` where ```x1``` and ```y1``` define one point, ```x2``` and ```y2``` define a second point, and ```x``` is the x-value for which you will compute the corresponding y-value.

Your program must output the slope-intercept formula for the given pair of points, then take the x-value as input, and finally print the computed y-value.  For example, the full interaction with the program must follow this structure:

```
Enter points for a linear equation:
x1? 1
y1? 1
x2? 5
y2? 5

The slope-intercept form for the line defined by the points (1,1) and (5,5) is:
y = 1.0 * x + 0.0

Enter an x-value:
x? 10
y = 10.0
```

Your program must follow the order of operations: input two points first, print the slope-intercept form second, input unknown x-value, and report computed y-value.

Make sure to test your program using a number of linear equations to verify that your program produces the correct output.  For example, test your program three different times with points that produce a different slope-intercept equation.  Validate that your program produces the correct solutions by performing the computations on paper and comparing your hand calculated solutions with the solutions generated by your program.

> We are not handling edge cases like division by zero.  We are not really equipped to check for errors in advance of computation yet, so avoid using input that will result in a calculation that result in division by zero.

### Submission

Create a zip file containing ```homework02.py``` and submit the zip file before the end of day next Friday (September 27, 2019)  
