---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 12 - Numpy"
date:   2019-11-20 00:00:00 -0400
date1:  2019-11-20 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-11-20 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 12 - Numpy

### Due Date
**The solutions to these exercises must be submitted by the end of the day.**

### Instructions

You are allowed to collaborate with your neighbor on these exercises.  Each of you must complete the programming tasks individually; however, you are encouraged to discuss and work together to design a solution to the problems.

Before beginning, make sure to create a new folder named ```exercises12``` in your class folder.

Create a .zip archive containing all of your code files and any written solutions and submit the .zip archive to blackboard as your solutions to these exercises.

You **MUST** include comments in your code.  For each function, you must also provide a block comment that precedes the function and describes every input to the function if it accepts any parameters, what the function does, and what the function returns if it returns a value.  If your code contains no comments, it is incomplete and will not receive credit.  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself.  You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the program does.  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

#### Exercise 1 - Compute statistical data for the last column in ```data.txt```

Create a file named ```exercise1.py```

In this exercise, you will compute the statistical information for the **last column** of the provided [```data.txt```]({{"/gwu/fa18/cs1012/assets/11_13_2018/data.txt" | absolute_url }}).  The statistical information that you need to compute is the minimum, maximum, mean, and standard deviation.  You are required to read the file into an array, compute the values, and print the calculations to the console.

Make sure to download [```data.txt```]({{"/gwu/fa18/cs1012/assets/11_13_2018/data.txt" | absolute_url }}) and save it into the directory containing ```exercise1.py```.

The output for your program should be:
```
min 0.00017756529318890824
max 0.9902558418244373
mean 0.4926828278976004
stddev 0.29062456165935907
```

Submit ```exercise1.py```

#### Exercise 2 - Sum the difference between each record in each column
Create a file named ```exercise2.py```

In this exercise, you will compute the difference between each record and its neighboring record for all columns in [```data.txt```]({{"/gwu/fa18/cs1012/assets/11_13_2018/data.txt" | absolute_url }}).  You will then sum the differences such that you have one total for each column and you will store this value in an array.  Print the array once the sum is calculated.

Make sure to download [```data.txt```]({{"/gwu/fa18/cs1012/assets/11_13_2018/data.txt" | absolute_url }}) and save it into the directory containing ```exercise2.py```.  Note that this is the same file from Exercise 1, so you do not need to download it again.

> Hint: You can reduce the amount of statements by using the optional parameter ```axis``` for both ```diff``` and ```sum```.  The axis parameter controls which axis (rows or columns) over which to perform the operation.  The ```axis``` is equal to ```0``` when operating on rows, and the ```axis``` is ```1``` when operating on columns.

The output for your program should be:
```
[ 0.48649163 -0.16240036  0.77426417 -0.36291086 -0.65425832]
```

Submit ```exercise2.py```

#### Exercise 3 - Generate a square multiplication table in a ```numpy``` array
Create a file named ```exercise3.py```

In this exercise, you will write a function that computes a square multiplication table, stores the table in a ```numpy``` array, saves the array as a file to disk, and returns the array.  The first row and first column should contain the number that is multiplied.  As a result, the size of the array (number of rows and columns) will actually be larger than the size requested.

Your function must have the following declaration where ```sz``` is the largest multiplier in the table:
```python
def multtable(sz):
```
Your main program should look like this:
```Python
print(multtable(3))
print(multtable(5))
```
Your output should look like this:
```
[[0. 1. 2. 3.]
 [1. 1. 2. 3.]
 [2. 2. 4. 6.]
 [3. 3. 6. 9.]]
[[ 0.  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.]
 [ 1.  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.]
 [ 2.  2.  4.  6.  8. 10.]
 [ 3.  3.  6.  9. 12. 15.]
 [ 4.  4.  8. 12. 16. 20.]
 [ 5.  5. 10. 15. 20. 25.]]
 ```

The file that is produced must be named ```multtable<sz>.txt``` where ```<sz>``` is replaced by the value passed into the ```multtable``` function.  For example, if ```multtable``` is called with the parameter ```5```, the file that must be written is ```multtable5.txt```.

There are many ways to accomplish this goal.  The key requirements that must be met are 1) the function must be generalized such that it can generate a multiplication table of any arbitrary size specified by the ```sz``` parameter, 2) the multiplication table is saved into a file, and 3) the function must return a ```numpy``` ```ndarray```.

Submit ```exercise3.py```
