---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-11-08 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-11-08 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 6 - Phone Book

### Due Date
**This homework is due November 17, 2019 at the end of day.**

## Introduction
You **MUST** include comments in your code.  If your code contains no comments, it is incomplete and will not receive credit.  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself.

You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the program does.  You must include comments preceding any functions that you declare that describe each of the function's inputs, what the function does, and what the function returns (if it returns a value).  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

## Phone book

A phone book map names to phone numbers.  In a more general sense, all records in a phone book contain name information along with an associated phone number.

Create a file named ```homework06.py```.

Every US phone number is prefixed by a three digit area code.  Traditionally, area codes would define the area within the country where a phone number is localized; however, with mobile phone and web phone technologies, phones are no longer guaranteed to be within that area.  US phone numbers may sometimes be written as (123)555-5555 where the area code prefix is indicated in the parentheses.      

Every US phone number also has an associated account holder.  For US residential users, the account holder is typically indicated by two names, surname and given name.

Our phone book will be represented as a list of lists.  Each record (list) in the phone book has the following organization ```"<lastname>", <firstname>, <10-digit-phonenumber>```.   A phone book with the described organization is provided below.  

For this homework, you will write a two functions that allow the records in a phone book to be filtered down to a smaller set based on very specific criteria related to the data in a phone book record.

The first function will allow a phone book to be filtered based on area code so that we can quickly filter down a master phone book by geographic region.  Your area code filter function must have the following definition:

```Python
def areacodefilter(pb, ac):
```
The ```areacodefilter``` function accepts a phone book ```pb``` and an area code ```ac``` as parameters.  The phone book must have the organization defined above and the area code may be provided as an integer or as a string.  ```areacodefilter``` searches the phone book ```pb``` for any records that have an area code that matches ```ac```, builds a list of all matching records, and returns the matching list.

The second function will allow a phone book to be filtered based on the last name of a person listed in the phone book so that we can quickly filter down a master phone book by people with the same surname.  Your last name filter function must have the following definition:

```Python
def lastnamefilter(pb, lastname):
```
The ```lastnamefilter``` function accepts a phone book ```pb``` and a last name ```lastname``` as parameters.  The phone book must have the organization defined above and the last name is provided as a string.  ```lastnamefilter``` searches the phone book ```pb``` for any records that have a last name that matches ```lastname```, builds a list of all matching records, and returns the matching list.

One of the novel things about these filters is that the output from both of these functions is a phone book itself.  This returned phone book is a subset of the phone book that was passed into the filter.  We can therefore combine usage of them in various ways to perform both area code and name filtering.  For example, we can filter a master phone book for DC area codes and then filter the DC phone book for all Smiths who we assume live in DC.  

Use the following as your master phone book:

```python
phonebook = [['DAVIDSON', 'WILLIAM', '2405557392'], ['BURCH', 'CATALINA', '3015552084'], ['SMITH', 'CHARLES', '5715551185'], ['HIGGINS', 'DARYL', '2405554741'], ['SCOTT', 'JOHN', '3015559185'], ['COLLIER', 'CRYSTAL', '3015557639'], ['MAXWELL', 'MATTHEW', '2025555478'], ['SLOAN', 'REBECCA', '2025559199'], ['GONZALES', 'GERALD', '3015558171'], ['SMITH', 'ANNIE', '2025557529'], ['ROSA', 'JASON', '3015552211'], ['SMITH', 'ELIZABETH', '3015551734'], ['SNYDER', 'ANTHONY', '2405551880'], ['HOGAN', 'CHRISTEEN', '5715557739'], ['HUBBARD', 'HAI', '2025554478'], ['DOWNS', 'MICHELLE', '5715556850'], ['CASTRO', 'AMBROSE', '5715554694'], ['JOHNSON', 'RUTH', '2405559549'], ['SMITH', 'LLOYD', '2405555995'], ['CARR', 'TRACY', '7035559683']]
```

Write your filter functions according to the instructions and then perform the following tasks:
1. Filter the master phone book for all DC area codes, the DC area code is 202, and print the DC phone book that is produced by filtering.
2. Filter the master phone book for all NOVA area codes, the NOVA area codes are 703 and 571, and print the NOVA phone book.  Ah, but wait the ```areacodefilter``` function only takes one area code!?!  So run the filtering process twice on the master phone book, once for each area code, and concatenate the results of the two together.
3. Filter the master phone book for all the people with a last name of Smith to produce a Smith phone book and print out the Smith phone book.
4. Filter the Smith phone book (or the NOVA phone book) for all Smiths that have NOVA phone numbers and print out the NOVA Smith phone book.

The results should look something like the following (note you may have different ordering, but all the indicated records must appear from printing the respective phone book):
1. DC phone book
```
[['MAXWELL', 'MATTHEW', '2025555478'], ['SLOAN', 'REBECCA', '2025559199'], ['SMITH', 'ANNIE', '2025557529'], ['HUBBARD', 'HAI', '2025554478']]
```
2. NOVA phone book
```
[['SMITH', 'CHARLES', '5715551185'], ['HOGAN', 'CHRISTEEN', '5715557739'], ['DOWNS', 'MICHELLE', '5715556850'], ['CASTRO', 'AMBROSE', '5715554694'], ['CARR', 'TRACY', '7035559683']]
```
3. Smith phone book
```
[['SMITH', 'CHARLES', '5715551185'], ['SMITH', 'ANNIE', '2025557529'], ['SMITH', 'ELIZABETH', '3015551734'], ['SMITH', 'LLOYD', '2405555995']]
```
4. NOVA Smith phone book
```
[['SMITH', 'CHARLES', '5715551185']]
```


### Submission

Create a zip file containing ```homework06.py``` and submit the zip file before the end of day November 17, 2019.  
