---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-11-15 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-11-15 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 7 - Bunco

### Due Date
**This homework is due November 26, 2019 at the end of day.**

## Introduction
You **MUST** include comments in your code.  If your code contains no comments, it is incomplete and will not receive credit.  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself.

You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the program does.  You must include comments preceding any functions that you declare that describe each of the function's inputs, what the function does, and what the function returns (if it returns a value).  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

## Bunco

Bunco is a popular dice game where players score points by rolling a number of dice.  A player has six rounds to roll three dice.  The first round is round 1, the second round is round 2, the third round is round 3, etc.  A round ends if a player fails to score during a roll.  

For our Bunco game, we will use the following scoring model.  To score, the player rolls the dice.  If all 3 dice match the round number, the player has rolled a "Bunco" and is awarded 21 points.  If all 3 dice match, but do not match the round number, the player has rolled a "mini-Bunco" and is awarded 5 points.  If the player does not roll either a Bunco or a mini-Bunco the player is awarded one point for each dice that matches the round number.  If the player fails to score any points during a roll, the round ends.  If the sixth round ends, the game is over.

The following output is a sample of what the game might look like:
```
Round: 1 Roll: 1
Bunco!
Rolled [1, 1, 1]
Scored 21 points on this roll.
Total score is 21
Round: 1 Roll: 2
Rolled [5, 1, 2]
Scored 1 points on this roll.
Total score is 22
Round: 1 Roll: 3
Rolled [1, 5, 2]
Scored 1 points on this roll.
Total score is 23
Round: 1 Roll: 4
Rolled [6, 3, 6]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 23
Failed to score.  Round 1 over.

Round: 2 Roll: 1
Rolled [2, 1, 2]
Scored 2 points on this roll.
Total score is 25
Round: 2 Roll: 2
Rolled [3, 5, 4]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 25
Failed to score.  Round 2 over.

Round: 3 Roll: 1
Rolled [6, 5, 4]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 25
Failed to score.  Round 3 over.

Round: 4 Roll: 1
Rolled [3, 3, 6]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 25
Failed to score.  Round 4 over.

Round: 5 Roll: 1
Rolled [2, 1, 1]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 25
Failed to score.  Round 5 over.

Round: 6 Roll: 1
Mini-bunco!
Rolled [3, 3, 3]
Scored 5 points on this roll.
Total score is 30
Round: 6 Roll: 2
Rolled [1, 5, 1]
Scored 0 points on this roll.
Total score is 30
Failed to score.  Round 6 over.

Game Over
```
In round 1, the target value is a 1 because the round number is 1.  On the first roll in round 1, the player rolled a Bunco (all dice show 1) and was awarded 21 points.  Because the player scored, that player continues to roll in round 1.  The player scores 1 additional point on the second roll in round 1 because the player rolled a 1 on one die and different values on the others so the round continues.  This pattern is repeated on the third roll of round 1 because the player scores 1 point on the third roll.  On the fourth roll of round 1, the player rolls the dice and none of the dice show a 1 (matching the round number) and all of the dice do not match each other (a mini-bunco), so the round is over.

In round 2, the target value is a 2 because the round number is 2.  On the first roll in round 2, the player scores 2 points because two of the dice show a 2 and the round continues because the player scored.  After this roll, the player fails to score in round 2 or several of the subsequent rounds.

In round 6, the target value is a 6 because the round number is 6.  On the first roll of round 6, the player scores a mini-bunco because the player rolled matching values on all dice however the value does not match the round number.  Because the player scored, the player rolls again in round 6.

## Assignment

Create a file named ```homework07.py```.

Write a program that simulates a game of Bunco for a single player.  This program will involve a number of loops and will need to roll dice.  You may include one or more functions to organize the program's structure.  Your program does not need to match the structure of the output from the provided example; however, your program must report the values from a dice roll, the score for a given roll, and must report the overall score after each roll.  The program must implement and adhere to all the rules described in the above section.   

### Submission

Create a zip file containing ```homework07.py``` and submit the zip file before the end of day November 26, 2019.  
