---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-10-04 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-10-04 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 4 - Conditionals

### Due Date
**This homework is due October 13, 2019 before end of day.**

## Introduction
This exercise is NOT a programming exercise but is instead a chance to practice using creating boolean expressions.  Write boolean expressions using Python syntax that meet the criteria described in the questions below into the specified file.  You are encouraged to use truth tables to determine the correct operands and operators.

You should write out your solutions for each problem.  You may do so electronically or using paper (and scan in your solutions into a single document).  You must include a truth table for each problem to be considered for partial credit.

### Homework 4

Each of these problems can be solved as a single logical statement.  Your answers are to be only one single expression on one single line.  You are _**not**_ permitted to solve these problems with control structures such as using a branch.
See [Formulating Logical Expressions]({{ "/gwu/fa19/cs1012/2019/09/30/discussion.html#Formulating-Logical-Expressions" | absolute_url }}) for example problems.

1. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```True``` if *all* of the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```a``` is True, ```b``` is False.
    1. ```c``` is negative, ```d``` is between ```-10``` and ```10``` exclusively.
    2. ```e``` is positive, ```f``` is outside the range ```[1,100]```.
    3. ```g``` is non-zero, ```h``` is even.
    5. ```i-10``` is smaller than ```0```, ```j``` is smaller than ```i```
2. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```True``` if *any* of the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```a``` is False, ```b``` is True.
    2. ```c``` is one of the following values ```1```, ```2```, ```3```.
    3. ```d``` is zero, ```e``` is outside the range ```[4,6]```.
    4. ```f``` is non-negative, ```g``` is odd.
    5. ```h+10``` is smaller than ```0```, ```i``` is smaller than ```h```
3. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```False``` if *all* the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```True```:
    1. ```a``` is True.
    2. ```b``` is negative, ```c``` is non-positive.
    3. ```d``` is non-zero, ```e``` is in the range ```(10,20)```.
    4. ```f``` is even, ```g``` is odd
    5. ```h-1``` is  larger than ```0```, ```i``` and ```f``` and not the same.
4. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```False``` if *any* the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```True```:
    1. ```a``` is larger than ```10``` but smaller than ```20```.
    2. ```b``` is True, ```c``` is not True.
    3. ```d``` is zero, ```e``` is non-negative.
    4. ```f``` is non-zero, ```g``` is odd.
    5. ```h+1``` is smaller than ```10```, ```i``` is smaller than ```h```


### Submission

Create a zip file containing your Homework 4 and submit the zip file by the end of day Sunday (October 13, 2019)  
