---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 9 - Strings "
date:   2019-10-09 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-10-09 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 9 Strings

### Due Date
**The solutions to these exercises must be submitted by the end of the day.**

### Instructions

Before trying to write any code, plan out how you will to use the primitives defined here to draw the solution.  If you don't plan, you may make a mistake and have to start over.  It's a good idea to have pen and paper available.

You are allowed to collaborate with your neighbor on these exercises.  Each of you must complete the programming tasks individually; however, you are encouraged to discuss and work together to design a solution to the problems.

Before beginning, make sure to create a new folder named ```lab09``` in your class folder.

Create a .zip archive containing all of your code files and any written solutions and submit the .zip archive to blackboard as your solutions to these exercises.

You **MUST** include comments in your code.  For each function, you must also provide a block comment that precedes the function and describes every input to the function if it accepts any parameters, what the function does, and what the function returns if it returns a value.  If your code contains no comments, it is incomplete and will not receive credit.  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself.  You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the program does.  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

## Exercise 1 - trimChar
Make a file called ``exercise1.py``

As a warmup, you will implement the ``trimChar`` function. This function must take in two parameters:
1. A ``String`` to be used. Name this `inputString`.
2. A ``character`` to be removed from the string. Name this `char`.

Your function definition will look like this:
``def trimChar(inputString, char): ``

Your function will return a new string with every character specified by the parameter removed from the old string.

Print these test cases:
1. ``trimChar('committee', 'e')`` returns the string: ``committ``
2. ``trimChar('citation', 't')`` returns the string: ``ciaion``
3. ``trimChar('academia', 'a')`` returns the string: ``cdemi``

> Hint: Strings are immutable, think about building strings rather than editing

## Exercise 2 - shiftString
Make a file called ``exercise2.py``

Here you will implement the ``shiftString`` function. This function must take in two parameters:
1. A ``String`` to be used. Call this `inputString`
2. An  ``increment`` value for each character in the string. Call this `inc`.

Your function definition will look like this:
``def shiftString(inputString, inc): ``

Your function will return a new string with every character shifted ``increment`` ascii values from the old string.

Print these test cases:
1. ``shiftString('value', 1)`` returns the string: ``wbmvf``
2. ``shiftString('school work', 4)`` returns the string: ``wglssp${svo``
3. ``shiftString('function', 2)`` returns the string: ``hwpevkqp``

> Hint: You can use the ``ord`` function to retrieve an ascii value of a given character.
The ``chr`` function will retrieve the character representation of a given ascii value (integer)


## Exercise 3 - containsString
Make a file called ``exercise3.py``

Here you will implement the ``containsString`` function. This function must take in two parameters:
1. A ``String`` to be used. Call this `hayStack`
2. A  ``sub String`` to be searched for in the parent string. Call this `needle`.

Your function definition will look like this:
``def containsString(hayStack, needle): ``

Your function will search through the string and return the first index where ``needle`` is found. This will be an *integer* value. If the needle is *not* found within the hayStack, return -1.

Print these test cases:
1. ``containsString('keyboard', 'key')`` returns the index ``0``.
2. ``containsString('keyboard', 'keys')`` returns -1.
3. ``containsString('zero plus one equals one', 'test')`` returns 10.

> Hint: think of this function as comparing the ``needle`` with *slices* of the haystack


Submit ```exercise1.py```, ```exercise2.py```, ```exercise3.py```.
