---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 4 - Type Conversion"
date:   2019-09-18 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-09-18 00:00:00 -0400
date1:   2019-09-18 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "fa19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 4 - Type Conversion

### Due Date
**The solutions to these exercises must be submitted by the end of the day.**

### Instructions

Before trying to write any code, plan out how you will to use the primitives defined here to draw the solution.  If you don't plan, you may make a mistake and have to start over.  It's a good idea to have pen and paper available.

You are allowed to collaborate with your neighbor on these exercises.  Each of you must complete the programming tasks individually; however, you are encouraged to discuss and work together to design a solution to the problems.

Before beginning, make sure to create a new folder named ```lab04``` in your class folder.

Create a .zip archive containing all of your code files and submit the .zip archive to blackboard as your solutions to these exercises.

### Introduction

This lab focuses on converting data from one type to another in order to use it in a proper context.  Recall that the ```+``` operator is interpreted as mathematical addition if the left operand is a numeric and as string concatenation if the left operand is a string.  In these exercises, you will need to take one or more inputs from the user using the ```input``` function, perform some computations using that input, and then output a message using the ```print``` function.  You must also dynamically build your output string using string concatenation and use only one single ```print``` function to print the output.  Your call to ```print``` will look something like this:

```python
print(msg)
```    
Where ```msg``` is a string containing the entire formatted string to output that has been constructed through one or more concatenation operations.

### Exercise 1 - Introduction
> This exercise uses input, strings, and formatted output.

Create a script named ```exercise1.py```.

Write a program that prompts the user to input their name.  The prompt should read ```What is your name?```.

Store the user's response in a variable.  Build a string that concatenates ```Hello ``` with the user input, and ```. I am Python.```.  Finally, print the entire string to the console.

**IMPORTANT:** Your output **must** be in this format:
```
What is your name? <user input>
Hello <concatenated user input>.  I am Python.
```

Run your program and make sure that your program produces the expected output.  For example, if ```John``` is entered in response to the prompt, interaction with the program would look like the following:
```
What is your name? John
Hello John.  I am Python.
```

### Exercise 2 - Quadratic Formula
> This exercise adds input and types to the quadratic exercise.

Create a script named ```exercise2.py```.

Last week we created a program that computed the roots of a Quadratic Equation; however, we hardcoded the coefficients into the program.  This means that we have to change the program every time that we wish to perform the computation.  Recall that one of our goals is **generalization**, so a more generalized program would have the flexibility to accept virtually any coefficients and calculate the roots.  To generalize the quadratic program, we will instead take the coefficients as user input.

Write a script that takes the user inputs ```a```, ```b```, and ```c``` for the Quadratic Equation.  Compute the two roots of the Quadratic using the Quadratic Formula, and print the roots to the console.

In the previous quadratic exercise, you were not required to use concatenation; however, in this exercise, create one string containing all of the calculated roots using concatenation and print this string once.

**IMPORTANT:** Your output **must** be in this format:
```
Input the coefficients for Quadratic Equation f(x):
a = <coefficient 1>
b = <coefficient 2>
c = <coefficient 3>

The Quadratic Equation has the following roots:
root = <calculated root 1>
root = <calculated root 2>
```

We cannot successfully compute roots for all Quadratics because some of the roots will be imaginary.  We will only test our scripts using a narrow set of coefficients that we can compute so that we do not generate any errors.  You must take user input using the ```input``` function.  Format your output and test your script with the following examples:

```
Input the coefficients for Quadratic Equation f(x):
a = 1
b = 0
c = -1

The Quadratic Equation has the following roots:
root = 1
root = -1
```

```
Input the coefficients for Quadratic Equation f(x):
a = 4
b = -3
c = -2

The Quadratic Equation has the following roots:
root = 1.175390529679106
root = -0.42539052967910607
```

```
Input the coefficients for Quadratic Equation f(x):
a = 2
b = -1
c = -2

The Quadratic Equation has the following roots:
root = 1.2807764064044151
root = -0.7807764064044151
```

#### Exercise 3 - Temperature Conversions

> This exercise uses: **input**, **strings**, and **types**.

Create a script named ```exercise3.py```.

The United States commonly uses the **Fahrenheit** scale. For scientific calculations, **Celsius** is used.
The formula to convert from Fahrenheit to Celsius is:

```
C = (F - 32) * 5/9
```

Write a program that takes a **Fahrenheit** temperature as input and prints out the temperature converted to **Celsius**.  

Your program must use the following format for the prompts and output:
```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: <input temp>
<input temp> degrees Fahrenheit is <computed temp> degrees Celsius.
```
**IMPORTANT:** The output string **must** be formed by concatenation.

Test your script with **all** of these examples:
```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 32
32.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 0.0 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 212
212.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 100.0 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 72
72.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 22.22222222222222 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: -40
-40.0 degrees Fahrenheit is -40.0 degrees Celsius.
```

> Note that the string representations of the numbers suggest the data types used in the calculation.

You will submit ```exercise1.py```, ```exercise2.py```, and ```exercise3.py```.
