---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-03-27 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-03-27 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 7

### Due Date
**This homework is due April 3, 2019 before class.**

## Introduction
You **MUST** include comments in your code.  If your code contains no comments, it is incomplete and will not receive credit.  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself.

You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the program does.  You must include comments preceding any functions that you declare that describe each of the function's inputs, what the function does, and what the function returns (if it returns a value).  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

## Converting a string to upper or lowercase

> The string type is really a class.  We will discuss classes a bit later but a class is a type with functions designed to operate on the class built into it.  Functions associated with a class are often called methods.

The string type has two methods attached to it that allow a string to be converted to uppercase ```upper()``` or to be converted to lowercase ```lower()```.  All strings whether variables or literals have these methods attached to them.  They are accessed using the dot operator.

For example, the literal string "HELLO" is converted to the string "hello" and then printed out by the following code:
```Python
print("HELLO".lower())
```
Alternatively, a variable that has a string type can be converted automatically using a similar approach.  For example the following code converts the first character in the string to uppercase and then concatenates the remaining part of the string as is:
```Python
s = "it was a dark and stormy night"
r = ""
for i in range(len(s)):
  if i == 0:
    r = s[i].upper()
  else:
    r += s[i]
print(r)
```

> The above example is pretty a verbose and inefficient way to implement this particular problem in Python.  There is a more concise way to express this problem which we will examine in lists.

## Pangram

A pangram is a word or phrase that contains all characters in the alphabet.  For example, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" is a pangram while "Hello world" is not a pangram.

Create a file named ```homework07.py```.

For this homework, you will write a function that determines whether or not a string is a pangram.  Your function must have the following definition:

```Python
def isPangram(s):
```

```isPangram``` returns a boolean value of ```True``` if ```s``` is a pangram and otherwise returns the boolean value of ```False```.

Recall that the alphabet has a sequence, _i.e._ 'a' precedes 'b' which precedes 'c', etc., and the characters in ASCII table are ordered based on alphabetical sequencing; however, the character 'a' actually has a value of 97 in the ASCII table.  There are 26 characters in the alphabet so in the ASCII table 'z' actually has a value of 122.  Note that ```122-97 = 25``` which is consistent because there are 25 characters after 'a'.

Also recall that the functions ```ord``` and ```chr``` allow us to convert a character back and forth between an integer or a string representation and that ```upper()``` and ```lower()``` allow a string, even a string consisting of a single character, to be converted to upper or lowercase respectively.

### Approach
There are several approaches that we might take to determine whether a string is a pangram; however, in this exercise, we will take a very straightforward but inefficient approach.

You will iterate over the alphabet, from 'a' to 'z'.  For each character in the alphabet, scan through the string ```s``` and look for a character in the string that matches the character in the alphabet.  If you ever reach the end of the string without matching the current alphabet character, the string cannot be a pangram.
If you locate a matching character in the string, advance to the next character in the alphabet.  If you reach the end of the alphabet without ever reaching the end of the string, the string must be a pangram.  

### Testing
Use the following test program to validate your ```isPangram``` function:
```python
s = ""
if(isPangram(s)):
  print("isPangram() incorrectly identified the empty string as a pangram")
s = "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ"
if(not isPangram(s)):
  print("isPangram() failed to identify the uppercase alphabet as a valid pangram")
s = "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ"
if(not isPangram(s)):
  print("isPangram() failed to identify the lowercase alphabet as a valid pangram")
s = "Hello world"
if(isPangram(s)):
  print("isPangram() incorrectly identified the string as a pangram: " + s)
s = "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog"
if(not isPangram(s)):
  print("isPangram() failed to identify a valid pangram: " + s)
print("Test completed")
```

### Submission

Create a zip file containing ```homework07.py``` and submit the zip file before class Wednesday following Spring Break (April 3, 2019)  
