---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2019-02-06 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2019-02-06 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp19"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 3

### Due Date
**This homework is due February 13, 2019 before class.**

### Homework 3 - Linear Formulas
Write a python script named ```homework03.py```.

In this homework, you will write a script that takes user input consisting of two points and an x-value and uses the linear formulas to compute a y-value.

Recall that the slope of a line is equal to ```rise/run``` where ```rise``` is equal to the difference between two ```y``` values and ```run``` is equal to the difference between two ```x``` values.  Also recall that the slope-intercept formula for a line is defined as ```y = mx + b```.  Given these formulas, we know that two points define a line and we can then compute the y-value of any other point on the line given an x-value.

You must take as user input ```x1```, ```y1```, ```x2```, ```y2```, and ```x``` where ```x1``` and ```y1``` define one point, ```x2``` and ```y2``` define a second point, and ```x``` is the x-value for which you will compute the corresponding y-value.

Your program must output the slope-intercept formula for the given pair of points, then take the x-value as input, and finally print the computed y-value.  For example, the full interaction with the program should follow this structure:

```
Enter points for a linear equation:
x1? 1
y1? 1
x2? 5
y2? 5

The slope-intercept form for the line is:
y = 1.0 * x + 0.0

Enter an x-value:
x? 10
y = 10.0
```

You are welcome to change the prompts and output strings to be more informative to the user; however, your program must follow the order of operations: input two points first, print the slope-intercept form second, input unknown x-value, and report computed y-value.

Make sure to test your program using a number of linear equations to verify that your program produces the correct output.

> We are not handling edge cases like division by zero.  We are not really equipped to check for errors in advance of computation yet, so avoid using input that will result in a calculation like division by zero.

### Extension - Visualization
This extension is not required and is entirely voluntary, but it does offer you a chance to dive a little deeper if you have time.

Plot the linear equation using ```turtle```.

### Submission

Create a zip file containing ```homework03.py``` and submit the zip file before class next Wednesday (February 13, 2019)  
