---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 8 - Modules"
date1:   2020-03-04 00:00:00 -0400
date2:   2020-03-06 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp20"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 8 - Modules

### Instructions

Before trying to write any code, plan out how you will to use the primitives defined here to draw the solution.  If you don't plan, you may make a mistake and have to start over.  It's a good idea to have pen and paper available.

You are allowed to collaborate with your neighbor on these exercises.  Each of you must complete the programming tasks individually; however, you are encouraged to discuss and work together to design a solution to the problems.

Before beginning, make sure to create a new folder named ```lab08``` in your class folder.

You **MUST** include comments in your code.  For each function, you must now also provide a block comment that precedes the function and describes the role of every parameter to the function (if it accepts any), what the function does, and what the function returns (if it returns a value).  Comments are as important to your code as the code itself, so code without comments will be considered incomplete.  You must include a comment in the header portion of the file that summarizes what the overall program does.  You must include comments inline with code to describe the steps in natural language.

#### Exercise 1 - Generating Random Floating Point Numbers
Create a file named ```exercise1.py```.

Write a script that defines a function to generate random floating point numbers between a low and high number and validate that your function correctly generates numbers in the range over 10000 trials.   

Write a function named ```randomfloat``` that takes a range as two parameters as defined by ```low``` and ```high```.  The definition for this function should be:

```python
def randomfloat(low,high):
```

```randomfloat``` generates a floating point value in the range of [low, high) and returns the generated value.  

Validate that your function works correctly using the main program below.  The test generates 10000 random floating point numbers and verifies that each number is within the expected range of numbers.  For each value outside the range, the program will report that value.  If the test fails at any point, the program will report that the test failed at the end; otherwise, the program will report success.

> Note that you may want to start with a smaller number of trials to begin with.  Start with 10 and then increase by a factor of 10 until you reach 10000 and no errors.s

```python
low = -0.5
high = -0.1
trials = 10000
failed = False          # a flag to indicate test status

# execute n trials
for i in range(trials):
    # generate a random floating point number in [low,high)
    value = randomfloat(low,high)
    #print(value)
    # validate that the result is within the range
    if value < low or value >= high:
        failed = True
        print("randomfloat generated value outside range: value =",value)

# report test status
if failed:
    print("Test failed")
else:
    print("Test succeeded")
```

#### Exercise 2 - Flipping Coins
Create a file named ```exercise2.py```.

In this program, we will simulate flipping a coin and find out the probability of a particular result coming up 'heads' or 'tails'.  If a coin is fair, we should expect the probability of either result to be 50%; however, experimental data might tell a slightly different story.

Write a script that defines a function to generate random a random integer with a value of either 0 or 1 and run a number of flips to count the instances of 0 or 1 that are generated.  Once you have counted each flip, compute the probability of a coin flip coming up heads or tails and report this probability.  Run your program 10 times and compare the computed probabilities between all runs.  Start with 10 flips per run.

> We run the experiment many times because the random number generator might give us great experimental results one time, but it is difficult to determine whether the process is fair from one run.  We also must be aware of our own biases when running an experiment as you may receive a result that you anticipate and declare victory when one experiment is not enough to draw a conclusion.  In this problem, we should think of one experiment as one single trial and one trial is not enough data to draw a statistically relevant conclusion.  

Write a function named ```flipcoin``` that takes no parameters.  The definition for this function should be:

```python
def flipcoin():
```

```flipcoin``` generates an integer value in the range of [0, 1] and returns the generated value.  

Write a main program that flips a coin a number of times and accumulates the total number of 0's (heads) generated and the total number of 1's (tails) generated.  

> Use a variable ```flips``` to control this process as it will come in handy when computing probability.

Once the program has counted the total of heads and tails generated over all flips, compute the probability of a heads outcome and the probability of a tails outcome by dividing each of these counts by the number of flips.  Report the probability of a heads or tails, the difference in probabilities, and the sum of the probabilities.

> For a fair coin, the probability of either outcome should be 50%, so the sum of the probabilities should be 100%.  If the probability of either outcome is 50%, the difference should be 0%.

The difference between the probabilities is really an unsigned distance.  To make a value unsigned, we can use the mathematical operation 'absolute value' to strip off the sign.  The ```math``` module provides a function ```math.fabs(value)``` that returns the absolute value of the parameter ```value```.

Run your program at least ten times and see what the computed probabilities are for each outcome.  You should see that for a small number of flips (10 flips), the probabilities can vary significantly.  You might get 50/50 a few times, but sometimes you might get 90/10.

Increase the number of flips by a factor of 10 and rerun the program 10 times and see how the increase in the number of flips smooths out the variance in the probability.  Keep increasing the number of flips by a factor of 10 and repeating the process until the difference in probabilities is consistently less than 1%.  

> How many times did you have to flip the coin to get a reasonably fair outcome, _i.e._ a difference less than 1%?  

#### Exercise 3 - Rolling 2 dice
Create a file named ```exercise3.py```.

Write a function to simulate rolling 2 six-sided dice and write a program to validate that your function correctly generates two die rolls in the expected range.  

Write two functions named ```rolldie``` and ```roll2dice```.  ```rolldie``` takes no parameters and returns a random value in the range from 1 to 6.  ```roll2dice``` takes no parameters and returns the two dice rolls as a pair of values.

We will validate that your ```roll2dice``` function works correctly by performing a test that repeatedly calls ```roll2dice``` and verifies that the sum of the dice falls within the expected range of values for rolling two dice.

Your main program will iterate 100 times.  Each iteration, call ```roll2dice``` and store the result of the function (a roll) in a pair of variables: ```die1``` and ```die2```.  For each roll, sum ```die1``` and ```die2``` and validate that the sum is in the range ```[2, 12]```.  If the sum is outside the range, the test fails, the program reports failure, and the program quits.  If the process successfully iterates 100 times without failure, the test is assumed to be a success, so the program should report success.

> Model this program on the example program in exercise 1; however, you will need to tease out some details specific to this program on your own.  Break down the problem into small pieces and address each individually.  For example, the first task is to write ```rolldie```, the second task is to write ```roll2dice```, the third task is to write the iteration part of the main program (don't worry about success of failure yet, instead print each roll in the first pass), and finally, figure out how to control the loop and report properly.  

> Recall that in class, you were shown how to return two independent values from a function with a form similar to the following:

```python
import math
def foo():
  x = 1
  y = math.pi
  return x, y

a,b = foo()
print(a,b)
```
