---
layout: post
title:  "Homework"
date:   2020-02-21 00:00:00 -0400
schedule:   2020-02-21 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "homework"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp20"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Homework 3 - Conditionals

### Due Date
**This homework is due February 28, 2020 at the end of day.**

## Introduction
This exercise is **NOT** a programming exercise but is instead a chance to practice your understanding of writing and interpreting boolean expressions.  

For this exercise you will write and interpret boolean expressions using Python syntax that meet the criteria described in the questions below.  You are encouraged to use truth tables to determine the correct operands and operators.

You should write out your solutions for each problem.  You may do so electronically or using paper (and scan in your solutions into a single document).

### Homework 4

#### Part 1 - Writing Boolean Expressions

**Each of these problems can be solved as a single logical statement**.  Your answers are to be only one single expression on one single line.  You are _**not**_ permitted to solve these problems with control structures such as using a branch.

1. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```True``` if *all* of the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```a``` is negative, ```b``` is between ```-10``` and ```10``` exclusively.
    2. ```c``` is positive, ```d``` is outside the range ```[1,100]```.
    3. ```f``` is non-zero, ```g``` is even.
    4. ```i-10``` is smaller than ```0```, ```j``` is larger than or equal to ```i```
2. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```True``` if *any* of the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```a``` is one of the following values ```1```, ```2```, ```3```.
    2. ```b``` is zero, ```c``` is inside the range ```[-1,1]```.
    3. ```f``` is non-negative, ```g``` is odd.
    4. ```h+10``` is smaller than ```0```, ```i``` is smaller than ```h```
3. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```False``` if *all* the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```True```:
    1. ```a``` is negative, ```b``` is non-positive.
    2. ```c``` is non-zero, ```d``` is in the range ```(10,20)```.
    3. ```f``` is even, ```g``` is odd
    4. ```h-1``` is  larger any of ```0```, ```m```, or ```n```.
4. Write a single logical expression that evaluates to ```False``` if *any* the following conditions are ```True```; otherwise the expression must evaluate to ```True```:
    1. ```a``` is larger than ```10``` but smaller than ```20```.
    2. ```d``` is zero, ```e``` is non-negative.
    3. ```f``` is non-zero, ```g``` is odd.
    4. ```h+1``` is smaller than or equal to ```10```, ```i``` is smaller than ```h```

#### Part 2 - Evaluating Logical Expressions

For each of the logical expressions numbered below, compute the truth value of the expression given the values of each of the variables.  In order to receive credit for these problems, you must break down the problem and show the truth value of each sub-expression and then show the steps based on precedence to build up the solution.  As an model, use the following example:

Example:

```s == True or t > 0 and t < 10``` where ```s=1``` and ```t=5```

```
True == True or 5 > 0 and 5 < 10    <- substitute variables in this step
True or (True and True)             <- evaluate subexpressions and show precedence  
True or True                        <- work from highest precedence down
True                                <- final answer
```

Problems:

1. ```x != 0 and y < 0 or y > 100``` where ```x=0``` and ```y=0```
2. ```i < 10 and j > m * n``` where ```i=1```, ```j=100```, ```m=10```, and ```n=10```
3. ```not(a > 0 or b > 0)``` where ```a=0``` and ```b=1```
4. ```p != 0 or q != 10 and not q > 10``` where ```p=0``` and ```q=20```

### Submission

Create a zip file containing your Homework 3 and submit the zip file by the end of day February 28, 2020.
