---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 3 - Working with Variables, Expressions, and Types"
date1:   2020-01-29 00:00:00 -0400
date2:   2020-01-31 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp20"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 3 - Working with Variables, Expressions, and Types

### Preface

Before trying to write any code, carefully consider how to apply the tools that we have discussed and those presented here to solve the problem.  If you don't plan, you may make a mistake and have to start over.  It's a good idea to have pen and paper available.

You are allowed to collaborate with your neighbor on these exercises.  However, each of you must complete the programming tasks individually, so you are encouraged to discuss and work together to design a solution to the problems but you must write your own code.

### Introduction

Unlike the simplicity of the Turtle exercises we've done thus far, computers are capable of much more useful functionality.  Today, we will introduce complexity by working with variables, expressions, and types.

In order to investigate some of these new topics, we will introduce how to generate simple output to and take simple input from the terminal.      

### Output to a Terminal Window / Printing
We can output information into the terminal by using the ```print``` command.  ```print``` writes one or more values to the terminal any string information that appears inside the parentheses.  Multiple strings can be printed to the terminal (separated by a space) if each string is separated by a comma.  

For example, run the following code:
```python
print("Hello World")
```
You will see the follow output in the terminal:
```
Hello World
```

Also run the following code:
```python
print("Hello", "World")
```
You will see the follow output in the terminal:
```
Hello World
```

Note that the above print statements produce equivalent output in the terminal even though we printed one string in the first example and two separate strings in the second example.

We can also output the values stored in a variable using the ```print``` command.  For example, the following code prints the value of the variable ```x```:

```python
x = 100
print(x)
```

We can also combine a string with a variable using the earlier comma separation technique to create a more meaningful output:

```python
x = 100
print('x =', x)
```

The above example prints the following output to the terminal:
```
x = 100
```

### Taking Input From the Console

The ```input(prompt)``` command or function allows a Python programmer to request input from a user at the command line and returns a string that can be used in an expression.  For example, the usage of ```input``` might look like the following:    

```python
x = input("Enter a value: ")
```

Note that the example shows that parameter provided to ```input```, described above as ```prompt```, must be a string.  You may use a variable or a hardcoded string, but either way, the type of the value inside the parentheses must be a string.

The ```prompt``` function returns a ```string``` which can be assigned to a variable or used directly in an expression.  In the example above, the value returned from ```prompt``` is assigned to the variable ```x```.

When the ```prompt``` function is called, python prints the message provided in the parameter, _i.e._ the prompt, to the console and waits until the user has input a response in the console.  The use must press the *RETURN*/*ENTER* key on the keyboard to indicate the end of the response.  Once the *RETURN*/*ENTER* key is pressed, the string typed by the user is then used in the expression where ```input``` appeared in the code, and the program resumes operation at that point.

In the above example, whatever information that was entered by the user before pressing the *ENTER* key is stored in the variable ```x```.

In order to use information input by the user, we must make sure that it is of the correct type.  The first question we must ask is what the inherent type of the information that was input.  The following code will make clear the inherent type of user input:

```python
x = input("Enter a value: ")
print(type(x))
```

If we run the above code several times and enter the following inputs:

```
1
1.0
abc
```
We will see that regardless of what values a user enters, the type is always reported as ```str``` or a string type.  If a programmer wishes to use a value entered by the user as a specific type, the programmer must convert the data returned from input as the desired type.  Recall that we may convert from one type to another using the type conversion functions.

## Exercises

### Exercise 1 - Introduction
> This exercise uses input, strings, and formatted output.

Create a script named ```exercise1.py```.

Write a program that prompts the user to input their name.  The prompt should read ```What is your name?```.

Store the user's response in a variable.  Build a string that combines ```Hello ``` with the user input, and ```. I am Python.```.  Finally, print the entire string to the console.

```
What is your name? <user input>
Hello <stored user input>.  I am Python.
```

Run your program and make sure that your program produces the expected output.  For example, if ```John``` is entered in response to the prompt, interaction with the program would look like the following:
```
What is your name? John
Hello John.  I am Python.
```

#### Exercise 2 - Temperature Conversions

> This exercise uses input, strings, and type conversion.  It also will force you to consider precedence when forming your calculations.

Create a script named ```exercise2.py```.

The United States commonly uses the **Fahrenheit** scale. For scientific calculations, **Celsius** is used.
The formula to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit is:

```
F = C * 9 / 5 + 32
```

Write a program that takes a **Fahrenheit** temperature as input and prints out the temperature converted to **Celsius**.  Note that you will need to isolate ```C``` in the above formula and rewrite it so that you are converting to Celsius rather than the other way around.s

Your program must use the following format for the prompts and output:
```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: <input temp>
<input temp> degrees Fahrenheit is <computed temp> degrees Celsius.
```

Test your script with **all** of these examples:
```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 32
32.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 0.0 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 212
212.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 100.0 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: 72
72.0 degrees Fahrenheit is 22.22222222222222 degrees Celsius.
```

```
Enter a temperature in Fahrenheit: -40
-40.0 degrees Fahrenheit is -40.0 degrees Celsius.
```

> Note that the string representations of the numbers suggest the data types used in the calculation.


### Exercise 3 - Linear Formulas

> This exercise uses input, strings, and type conversion.  It also will force you to consider precedence when forming your calculations.

Create a script named ```exercise3.py```.

Recall that the slope ```m``` of a line is equal to ```rise/run``` where ```rise``` is equal to the difference between two ```y``` values and ```run``` is equal to the difference between two ```x``` values.  Also recall that the slope-intercept formula for a line is defined as ```y = mx + b``` where ```b``` is the ```y``` value where ```x = 0```.  Given these formulas, we know that two points define a line and we can then compute the y-value of any other point on the line given an unknown x-value.

Write a program that initially takes user input ```x1```, ```y1```, ```x2```, and ```y2```.  From these inputs compute the slope of the line, ```m```, between the two points ```(x1, y1)``` and ```(x2,y2)```.  Once you have computed ```m```, you can then compute the intercept of the line with the y-axis, ```b```, by solving the equation ```b = y1 - m * x1```.  Once you have computed ```m``` and ```b```, print the slope intercept form for the line defined by ```(x1, y1)``` and ```(x2,y2)``` to the console.

Finally, prompt the user to input a new ```x```.  Compute the corresponding ```y``` value for this input ```x``` and print the resulting ```y``` to the console.

The following example illustrates the interaction of the program with the user:

```
x1? 1
y1? 1
x2? 5
y2? 5

y = 1.0 * x + 0.0

x? 10
y = 10.0
```

Your program must follow the order of operations: input two points first, print the slope-intercept form second, input unknown x-value, and report computed y-value.

The following is a second example that you help you test:
```
x1? -1
y1? 1
x2? 2
y2? 3

y = 0.6666666666666666 * x + 1.6666666666666665

x? 5
y = 5.0
```

You must test your program to verify that your program produces the correct output.  There are two examples, provided in this document; however, you should develop additional tests.  Compute the slope-intercept form for at least one other test case by hand and use these values to verify that your program produces the correct results.  


> We are not handling edge cases like division by zero.  We are not really equipped to check for errors in advance of computation yet, so avoid using input that will result in a calculation that result in division by zero.
