---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 6 - Conditional Logic"
date1:   2020-02-19 00:00:00 -0400
date2:   2020-02-21 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [GWU]
docclass: "lab"
gwclass: "cs1012"
term: "sp20"
---
<head>
  <link href="/css/syntax.css" rel="stylesheet">
</head>

## Lab 6

## Introduction
This lab will focus entirely on forming and analyzing logical statements.  It is **NOT** a programming exercise.  You will not use Python at all for this exercise or for the associated homework.  

This is a handwritten exercise, and you are encouraged to use pen and paper to work through these problems.  You are also encouraged to use truth tables to help you formulate correct logical statements.

### Exercise 1 - Deriving Logical Expressions

This exercise is **NOT** a programming exercise but is instead a chance to practice creating boolean expressions.  For the following cases, write boolean expressions that meet the criteria described.  You are encouraged to use truth tables to determine the correct logical operators that join each sub-expression.

1. Write individual boolean expression for each set of the logical conditions listed below.  Each expression must evaluate to ```True``` if *all* of the conditions for a given expression are ```True``` and otherwise evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```x``` is negative, ```y``` is between ```1``` and ```10``` exclusively.
    2. ```z``` is positive or negative.
    3. ```a``` is non-zero, ```b``` is even.
2. Write individual boolean expression for each set of the logical conditions listed below.  Each expression must evaluate to ```True``` if *any* of the conditions for a given expression are ```True``` and otherwise evaluate to ```False```.
    1. ```c``` is one of the following values ```1```, ```2```, and ```3```.
    2. ```d``` is zero, ```e``` is not between ```4``` and ```6``` inclusively.
    3. ```f``` is non-negative, ```g``` is positive.
3. Write individual boolean expression for each set of the logical conditions listed below.  Each expression must evaluate to ```False``` if *all* of the conditions for a given expression are ```True``` and otherwise evaluate to ```True```.
    1. ```i``` is False, ```j``` is in the interval ```[0,1)```.
    2. ```m``` is non-zero, ```n``` is zero.
4. Write individual boolean expression for each set of the logical conditions listed below.  Each expression must evaluate to ```False``` if *any* of the conditions for a given expression are ```True``` and otherwise evaluate to ```True```.
    1. ```p``` is True, ```q``` is outside the interval ```(-1,1)```.
    2. ```r``` is zero, ```s``` is non-negative.

### Exercise 2 - Evaluating Logical Expressions

Given the following logical expressions and the associated variables with the described values, determine what the logical value of the overall expression evaluates to.

1. ```x > 0 and (y < 0 or y > 100)``` where ```x=0``` and ```y=50```
2. ```i % 2 == 0 or i > j + 1 and j < 0``` where ```i=1``` and ```j=-1```
3. ```not(m != 0 and n == 0)``` where ```m=1``` and ```n=0```
4. ```p <= 0 or not q == 0 and q < 10``` where ```p=1``` and ```q=50```
